Now the topic is very very important topic.
This topic is loops which are also called as a repeating statements or interative statements.
That's the same time this topic plays a very key role in programming and this is a new topic for the
beginners right.
Like if you're coming from mathematics, mathematics doesn't have loops.
So here you have to learn something new in programming and this needs a lot of practice.
What all the programs you learn here under this topic.
You must practice all of them and you should solve a set of challenges.
And coding exercises you must do. if you are confident in this part of programming.
Then you can solve any problem.
If you have some knowledge about that problem.
Now let us see what other loops available in C++.
C++ is having three type of loops, while loop do while loop, for loop and for each loop.
now in this video I'll be giving you introduction to the loops and also I will be explaining these
first two then next video we  will see for loop and for each loop we will see  at some other time. now what are
these loops.
Let us understand from this flowchart.
We have already done some flowchart.
Now let us look at this flow chart.
How it is working.
I will trace it and show you, starting point and some input is taking.
Whatever the problem it is, some input it is taking.
The processing is done after that condition is checked.
If the condition is true then again it goes back here and processing is done and the condition is true.
Again processing is done.
This will be repeating.
So this block, this processing part, will be go on
Repeating as long as that condition is true and once the conditions become false it will come out and
whatever the output it has to print and then stop, so in any procedure.
If you have to repeatedly execute some set of statements then you can repeatedly execute them.
So using loop this is a loop so these statements are used for repeatedly executing set of statements.
This type of thing we do commonly in our daily life repeatedly we perform some steps like I'll take
some simple example suppose you have a coffee and you have to add some sugar in that so you'll put some
sugar teaspoon of sugar and you wil stir it and check it
It's not sweet yet though I can put some sugar and stir it and check it's not sweet yet then again put it.
So you will continue as long as it does not sweet, when it is sufficiently sweet then you will stop so
put the sugar stir it and check it, put the sugar stir it and check it.
So this is repeating procedure.
Let us take one more example.
You are walking towards your home.
I have not reached home.
Then take a step walk and then walk and check.
You have reached home.
I have not been at home.
Then take a step.
I have not reached home.
Take a step.
So as long as you have not reached home you will be going on taking steps.
One more thing we have seen in the number system like converting a decimal number called binary number
divided by two, divided by two, divided by two.
How long?  until it becomes zero.
So is it zero,  not zero continue, not zero, divide, not zero divide, not zero divide, Zero.
Stop.
So thats how at many places we use repeatation so in computation also use repeatation.
The example I give you converting into decimal, decimal  to binary so thats how we solve those problems
which have repeating steps using these loops.
Now let us understand how these loops work.
I will pick up a while and do while, I ill show this  skeleton and also the flow chart.
Then later we will see a problem or a program on that let us look at the syntax of two loops.
That is wild and do while.
So here is the syntax while condition is there.
And then this is the body of while loop flower brackets are used, inside that process whatever
you want to do you can write on that inside. then do while, do
First then flower bracket then inside the process is there.
Then while condition is at the end and the condition that must be closed with semicolon it should end with
Semicolon right.
There is no need of semicolon here but here semicolon this must.
So this is first checking the condition then performing process.
This is first processing and then checking the condition.
This is different.
So there's a minor difference.
It's not a big difference.
They're almost the same.
Mostly student get confused here.
What is the difference.
Which one do you use.
So it's not a big deal you can use any one of them.
Only the difference is this will first process then check the condition.
It means the difference i.
If already the condition is false then this will not execute,  here,
If already the condition is false, suppose first time only the condition is false then first it will execute.
Then check the condition.
So it will execute minimum one time.
That's the difference.
No where to use them.
Are there any different places to use.
There's nothing like that.
Mostly program use this loop also this loop also, so there's not a big difference.
Now
Let us understand diagrametically, here
This is a flowchart so we're just starting and has
Something in the beginning.
Just leave it.
Look at it from this point.
First condition is check.
If it is true then processes is done.
Then again it goes back to this point so that again check the condition.
If it is true then processes is done then repeat.
So this is how process is repeating if the condition is false then it will continue normally.
It will come out of this loop and continue normally.
So first condition is checked and the processes are done.
So this is a flowchart for while loop. now do while loop.
Start first process is done.
Conditions check.
And if yes then it will again come on the process and repeat the process so first process is done
done then condition is check out if the condition is false then it will continue outside the loop it will
continue the rest of the statements.
So this is the flow chart for do while loop.
No I will write on a program first using while loop.
I will write a program for displaying numbers from one to n and can be 10 or 20 whatever it is
so  if it is  suppose
n is a 10.
We will display numbers from 1 2 3 4 5 to 10.
Let us write the program for this one for displaying n numbers.
Okay.
First I will write a program for this using this loop.
Then again I will convert that program and show you how to write on the same thing using do while loop.
So let us look at the program.
Let us write a program for displaying numbers from 1 to n, so for that already I have a flowchart.
Let us see the working flow chart.
First of all we should know a number that 10, 20 till where you want to display a number.
Write from 1 to till what.
So that is an idea.
Now suppose if I have to display up to ten let us say n is 10 then I have to display numbers from
1 2 3 4.
So on so for that I need something to count, counter
Right.
So for that I have I that is i is initially one here I used initially 1.
So I will start from 1 onwards.
So 1.
Then check if i is less than equal to n.
n is what?  10.
So now I will not say n.
i will say 10.  I  less than equal to 10.
Yes.
Then do what? print i, I value is what,  1.
Then I assign with i plus 1 we have seen this in incremental agreement operate at that time I have shown
you.
this is a common practice.
This is useful for counting that whatever the value of i is you are adding one to it so increment.
So I will become two.
This is the first step.
print I.
I was one initially then increment.
I to next number.
That is 1.
Then continue so again check the condition again check the condition 2 is less than equal to 10.
Yes.
So print and increment.
So the next is print.
Now.
2.
I is two then after that increment this becomes 3.
Then again after this continue loop right.
This is using while loop.
So next again check the condition i is less than equal to n.
So 3 is less than equal to 10 yes.
So next step.
Print and increment.
So no I will be repeating it three and four then four then it will become five.
Five is less than ten so five then make six then six is less than equal to ten to bring six and make
it seven seven then eight that eight then increment nine.
Then print nine increment 10 10 is less than equal to.
Yes so print then increment eleven.
Now print an eleven this time i is less that equal to 10.
No false.
So stop.
After this it will stop.
So I have shown you the working of the flow chart.
It's working like this.
Now let us convert that flow chart in to program.
See for lighting the programs like this.
First of all we should figure out what you have to do.
First you should do this.
Then from this you get data of flow chart.
You will not directly get the idea of  flow chart.
Work on this one.
Prepare a table like this and try to work out what you want.
Then based on this there's a flow chart from that flowchart.
I will write down a C++ programming so int main now inside this.
I need some variables.
What are those n and eye.
So I will declare those are int type.
So n
And I what's the first thing enter a number and read a number.
So C out enter a number and read a number.
C out enter number then C in n now initially I is assigned one so I don't have to do it here I
can directly assign it is equals to one here that is in the beginning next check the condition and repeat
the statement.
So this is loop so while Loop, while,  What is the condition in while.
I is less than equal n.
I is less than or equal to n then what is there inside the body of loop print  I then increment i so
print i Cout I then, I initially is one it will print one then 2 should come in the next line.
So here I should write down endl then next the statement is I plus plus.
So instead of writing I assign i plus one.
We have an agreement operator i plus plus this we can use even you can use plus plus i.
Then after this end of this one end of the main function.
So here you have to write down return zero.
You know well.
So this is a program for printing numbers from one to give a number n.
And that's it.
Now I will show you how to convert.
Same thing using do while loop.
Okay so I will make changes in the flowchart and then I will show you changes in the program.
Yes I have made changes to the flowchart.
Let us read the flow chart.  start,
Take a number.
I assign one then.
First print.
Then incrementally.
Then afterwards to check if I is less than equal to n if it is less than or equal to N if it is true
then continue.
If it is false then stop.
So you can see now that condition is checked afterwards.
First the two statements are done so processing is done first.
So you get the same result.
Same thing everything just instead of writing while here.
I have to write do and here.
I should write down while i is less than or equal to n that's all.
So this is the program for do while loop for printing the numbers using do while loop.
So that's easy.
So there is no confusion.
I'll tell you that always you can write a code using while loop also do while loop also. same thing can be
written.
It's like a choice.
Very rarely we come across that, first
We need to process then check the condition.
Very rare situations.
So if you come across that situation you will understand.
That that's all about this one.
So I'll be giving you a coding exercise for this.
So you may have to write down only the loop part, if you find the coding exercises for this.
Just write down the loop.
Okay for loop and also there is a demo given for this one.
So you look at the demo for while do while as well as including for loop. so now next video will
be on for loop.
And that is most commonly used.
Loop.
Let us look at follow.